I

115TH CONGRESS
1ST SESSION

H. R. 4625

To require the Secretary of Commerce to establish the Federal Advisory
Committee on the Development and Implementation of Artificial Intelligence, and for other purposes.

IN THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
DECEMBER 12, 2017
Mr. DELANEY (for himself, Mr. OLSON, Mr. TED LIEU of California, Mr.
KHANNA, Mr. CLEAVER, Mr. DESAULNIER, and Mr. MICHAEL F. DOYLE
of Pennsylvania) introduced the following bill; which was referred to the
Committee on Energy and Commerce, and in addition to the Committees
on Science, Space, and Technology, Education and the Workforce, Foreign Affairs, the Judiciary, and Oversight and Government Reform, for
a period to be subsequently determined by the Speaker, in each case for
consideration of such provisions as fall within the jurisdiction of the committee concerned
A BILL
To require the Secretary of Commerce to establish the Federal Advisory Committee on the Development and Implementation of Artificial Intelligence, and for other purposes.
Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the United States of America in Congress assembled,
SECTION 1. SHORT TITLE.
This Act may be cited as the ‘‘Fundamentally Understanding The Usability and Realistic Evolution of Artificial Intelligence Act of 2017’’ or the ‘‘FUTURE of Artifi2 cial Intelligence Act of 2017’’.
SEC. 2. SENSE OF CONGRESS.
with BILLS
It is the sense of Congress that—
(1) understanding and preparing for the ongoing development of artificial intelligence is critical to
the economic prosperity and social stability of the
United States;
(2) as artificial intelligence evolves, it can greatly benefit society by powering the information economy, fostering better informed decisions and helping
unlock answers to questions that, as of the date of
the enactment of this Act, are unanswerable;
(3) for the reasons set forth in paragraph (2)
it’s beneficial to better understand artificial intelligence and foster the development of artificial 
intelligence in a manner that maximizes its benefit to society; and
(4) it is critical that the priorities of the advisory committee established under section 4(a)(1) include 
developing guidance or recommendations—
(A) to promote a climate of investment and
innovation to ensure the global competitiveness of the United States;
(B) to optimize the development of artificial intelligence to address the potential growth,
restructuring, or other changes in the United States workforce that results from the development of artificial intelligence;
(C) to promote and support the unbiased
development and application of artificial intelligence; and
(D) to protect the privacy rights of individuals.
SEC. 3. DEFINITIONS.
(a) IN GENERAL.—Except as provided in subsection
(b), in this Act:
ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE.—The artificial intelligence’’ includes the following:
Any artificial systems that perform
tasks under varying and unpredictable circumstances, without significant human oversight, 
or that can learn from their experience
and improve their performance. Such systems may be developed in computer software, physical hardware, or other contexts not yet contemplated. They may solve tasks requiring
human-like learning, communication, or physical action. In perception, cognition,
general, the more human-like the system within
the context of its tasks, the more it can be said
to use artificial intelligence.
(B) Systems that think like humans, such
as cognitive architectures and neural networks.
(C) Systems that act like humans, such as
systems that can pass the Turing test or other
comparable test via natural language processing, 
knowledge representation, automated
reasoning, and learning.
(D) A set of techniques, including machine learning, that seek to approximate some cognitive task.
(E) Systems that act rationally, such as intelligent software agents and embodied robots
that achieve goals via perception, planning, reasoning, learning, communicating, decision making, and acting.
GENERAL INTELLIGENCE.—The
term ‘‘artificial general intelligence’’ means a notional future artificial intelligence system that exhib-
its apparently intelligent behavior at least as advanced as a person across the range of cognitive,
emotional, and social behaviors.
(3) NARROW
ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE.—The
term ‘‘narrow artificial intelligence’’ means an artificial intelligence system that addresses specific application 
areas such as playing strategic games, language translation, self-driving vehicles, and image recognition.
(b) MODIFICATIONS.—The Federal Advisory Committee on the Development and Implementation of Artifi9 cial Intelligence established under section 4(a) may revise
10 such definitions under subsection (a) of this section as the
11 advisory committee considers appropriate.
SEC. 4. ESTABLISHMENT OF FEDERAL ADVISORY COMMITTEE ON THE DEVELOPMENT AND IMPLEMENTATION OF ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE.
(1) IN
GENERAL.—The Secretary of Commerce
shall establish a Federal advisory committee to advise the Secretary on matters relating to the development 
of artificial intelligence.
(2) DESIGNATION.—The Federal advisory committee 
established under paragraph (1) shall be
known as the ‘‘Federal Advisory Committee on the
Development and Implementation of Artificial Intelligence’’ (in this section the ‘‘Advisory Committee’’).
(b) PURPOSES OF THE ADVISORY COMMITTEE.—
(1) ADVICE.—The Advisory Committee shall
provide advice to the Secretary on matters relating
to the development of artificial general intelligence
and narrow artificial intelligence, including on the
following as they relate to artificial intelligence:
(A) The competitiveness of the United
States, including matters relating to the promotion of public and private sector investment
and innovation into the development of artificial intelligence.
(B) Workforce, including matters relating
to the potential for using artificial intelligence
for rapid retraining of workers, due to the possible effect of technological displacement.
(C) Education, including matters relating
workforce as the needs of employers change.
(D) Ethics training and development for
with BILLS technologists working on artificial intelligence.
(E) Matters relating to open sharing of
data and the open sharing of research on artificial intelligence.
(F) International cooperation and competitiveness, including matters relating to the competitive international 
landscape for artificial intelligence-related industries.
(G) Accountability and legal rights, including matters relating to the responsibility for
any violations of laws by an artificial intelligence system and the compatibility of international regulations.
(H) Matters relating to machine learning bias through core cultural and societal norms.
(I) Matters relating to how artificial intelligence can serve or enhance opportunities in rural communities.
(J) Government efficiency, including matters relating to how to promote cost saving and streamline operations.
(2) STUDY.—The Advisory Committee shall
study and assess the following:
(A) How to create a climate for public and
private sector investment and innovation in artificial intelligence.
(B) The possible benefits and effects that
the development of artificial intelligence may
have on the economy, workforce, and competitiveness of the United States.
(C) Whether and how networked, automated, artificial intelligence applications and
robotic devices will displace or create jobs and
how any job related gains relating to artificial
intelligence can be maximized.
(D) How bias can be identified and eliminated in the development of artificial intelligence 
and in the algorithms that support
them, including with respect to the following:
(i) The selection and processing of
data used to train artificial intelligence.
(ii) Diversity in the development of artificial intelligence.
(iii) The ways and places the systems
are deployed and the potential harmful outcomes.
(E) Whether and how to incorporate ethical standards 
in the development and implementation of artificial intelligence.
(F) How the Federal Government can encourage technological 
progress in implementation of artificial intelligence that benefits the
full spectrum of social and economic classes.
(G) How the privacy rights of individuals
are or will be affected by technological innovation relating to artificial intelligence.
(H) Whether technological advancements
in artificial intelligence have or will outpace the
legal and regulatory regimes implemented to
protect consumers.
(I) How existing laws, including those concerning data access 
and privacy, should be modernized 
to enable the potential of artificial intelligence.
(J) How the Federal Government utilizes
artificial intelligence to handle large or complex
data sets.
(K) How ongoing dialogues and consultations with multi-stakeholder groups can maximize 
the potential of artificial intelligence and
further development of artificial intelligence
technologies that can benefit everyone inclusively.
How the development of artificial intelligence can affect cost savings and streamline
operations in various areas of government oper-
ations, including health care, cybersecurity, in-
frastructure, and disaster recovery.
(M) Such other matters as the Advisory
Committee considers appropriate.
(3) REPORTS
(A) REPORT
BY ADVISORY COMMITTEE.—
Not later than 540 days after the date of the
enactment of this Act, the Advisory Committee
shall submit to the Secretary and to Congress
a report on the findings of the Advisory Committee and such 
recommendations as the Advisory Committee may have for administrative or
legislative action relating to artificial intelligence.
Not later than 90 days after receiving the report submitted under subparagraph (A), the
Secretary shall review the report and submit to
Congress such recommendations as the Secretary may have with respect to the matters
contained in the report submitted under sub-
paragraph (A).
(c) MEMBERSHIP.—
(1) VOTING
AND RECOMMENDATIONS.—
MEMBERS.—
GENERAL.—The
Advisory Committee shall be composed of 19 voting members
who shall be appointed by the Secretary of
Commerce, with advisement from the Chair and
Ranking Member of the Committee on Commerce, Science, and Transportation of the Senate 
and the Chair and Ranking Member of the
Committee on Energy and Commerce of the
House of Representatives, for purposes of the
Advisory Committee from among individuals
with expertise in matters relating to workforce
development, ethics, privacy, artificial intelligence, or computer science.
(B) REPRESENTATION.—In carrying out
subparagraph (A), the Secretary shall ensure
that voting members are appointed as follows:
(i) Five members from academic or
research community.
(ii) Six members from private industry, at least one of whom shall be from a
small business concern.
(iii) Six from civil society, at least two
of whom shall be from groups that advocate for civil liberties or civil rights.
(iv) Two from labor organizations or groups.
(A), the Secretary shall
ensure that the voting members of the Advisory
Committee come from diverse geographical locations 
within the United States.
MEMBERS.—The
Committee shall also be composed of such nonvoting
members as the Secretary considers appropriate, except 
that the Secretary shall appoint at least one
such member from each of the following:
(A) The Department of Education.
(B) The Department of Justice.
(C) The Department of Labor.
(D) The Department of Transportation.
(E) The Federal Trade Commission.
(F) The National Institute of Standards
and Technology.
(G) The National Science Foundation.
(H) The National Science and Technology
Council.
(I) Such other nonvoting members as the
voting members of the Advisory Committee consider appropriate.
(3) CHAIRPERSON.—The Secretary shall appoint a chairperson for the Advisory Committee
from among the members appointed under para-
(d) MEETINGS.—The Advisory Committee shall
2 meetin person no less frequently than twice each
year; and
(2) via telepresence no less frequently than once
every two months.
(e) POWERS.—In order to carry out its duties under
subsection (b), the Advisory Committee may—
(1) hold such hearings, sit and act at such
times and places, take such testimony, and receive
such evidence as the Advisory Committee considers
appropriate;
(2) submit to Congress such recommendations
as the Advisory Committee considers appropriate;
(3) submit to Federal agencies such recommendations as the Advisory Committee considers
appropriate;
(4) issue reports, guidelines, and memoranda;
(5) hold or host conferences and symposia;
(6) enter into cooperative agreements with
third-party experts to obtain relevant advice or expertise, and oversee staff;
(7) establish subcommittees; and
(8) establish rules of procedure.
(f) TRAVEL EXPENSES.—The members of the Advi-
2 sory Committee shall be allowed travel expenses, including
3 per diem in lieu of subsistence, at rates authorized for em4 ployees of agencies under subchapter I of chapter 57 of
5 title 5, United States Code, while away from their homes
6 or regular places of business in the performance of services
7 for the Advisory Committee.
(g) FUNDING.—
as provided in para-
graph (2), amounts to carry out this section shall be
derived from amounts appropriated or otherwise
made available to the Secretary of Commerce.
(2) DONATIONS.—
(A) AUTHORIZATION.—The Advisory Committee may solicit and accept donations from
private persons and non-Federal entities to
carry out this section.
(B) LIMITATION.—Of the amounts expended by the Advisory Committee in a fiscal
year to carry out this section, not more than
half may be derived from amounts received
under subparagraph (A).
