I
115TH CONGRESS
2D SESSION
H. R. 4829

To promote a 21st century artificial intelligence workforce.

IN THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
JANUARY 18, 2018
Mr. SOTO (for himself, Mr. KRISHNAMOORTHI, Mr. FERGUSON, Mrs. DINGELL, Mr. MITCHELL, Mr. TAKANO, Mr. NORMAN, Ms. BLUNT ROCHESTER, Mr. GALLAGHER, Mrs. COMSTOCK, Mr. SCOTT of Virginia, and
Mr. COURTNEY) introduced the following bill; which was referred to the
Committee on Education and the Workforce
A BILL
To promote a 21st century artificial intelligence workforce.
Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the United States of America in Congress assembled,

SECTION 1. SHORT TITLE.
This Act may be cited as the ‘‘Artificial Intelligence

5 Job Opportunities and Background Summary Act of 2018’’ or the ‘‘AI JOBS Act of 2018’’.
7

SEC. 2. SENSE OF CONGRESS.


8

It is the sense of Congress that technology can improve the lives of individuals, but can also disrupt jobs,
10 and for this reason, innovation should be encouraged while
1 training and retraining American workers for our 21st
2 century economy.
SEC. 3. REPORT ON ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE.
(a) REPORT REQUIREMENTS.—Not later than 1 year

5 after the date of the enactment of this Act, the Secretary
6 of Labor, in collaboration with the individuals and entities
7 described in subsection (b), shall prepare and submit to
8 the Committee on Education and the Workforce of the
9 House of Representatives and the Committee on Health,
10 Education, Labor, and Pensions of the Senate, a report
11 on artificial intelligence and its impact on the workforce,
12 which shall include the following:
(1) Outline the specific data, and the availability 
of such data, necessary to properly analyze
the impact and growth of artificial intelligence.
(2) Identification of industries that are projected 
to have the most growth in artificial intelligence use, and whether the technology will result in

the enhancement of workers’ capabilities or their replacement.
(3) Analysis of the expertise and education (including computer science literacy) needed to develop,
operate, or work alongside artificial intelligence over
the next two decades, as compared to the levels of
such expertise and education among the workforce

2

as of the date of enactment of this Act.

3

(4) Analysis of which demographics (including
ethnic, gender, economic, age, and regional) may experience expanded career opportunities, and which
such demographics may be vulnerable to career displacement, due to artificial intelligence.
(5) Any recommendations to alleviate workforce
displacement, prepare future workforce members for
the artificial-intelligence economy, and any other relevant observations or recommendations within the
field of artificial intelligence.
(b) COLLABORATION.—In preparing the report under
14 subsection (a), the Secretary of Labor shall collaborate,
15 through a series of public meetings, roundtables or other
16 methods, with—
(1) local educational agencies, institutions of
higher education (including community colleges),
workforce-training organizations, and National Laboratories;
(2) a broad range of industrial stakeholders in
the technology and manufacturing sectors, including
companies (large and small), think tanks, and industry organizations; and
(3) the Secretary of Commerce, the Director of
the Bureau of the Census, and the heads of any
other Federal agency the Secretary of Labor determines appropriate.
SEC. 4. DEFINITIONS.

In this Act:

(1) ARTIFICIAL

(A) think like humans (including cognitive architectures and neural networks);

11

(B) act like humans (such as passing the

12

Turing test using natural language processing,

13

knowledge representation, automated reasoning,

14

and learning);

15

(C) think rationally (such as logic solvers,

16

inference, and optimization);

17

(D) act rationally (such as intelligent software agents and embodied robots that achieve

19

goals via perception, planning, reasoning, learning, communicating, decision-making, and acting); or
(E) automate or replicate intelligent behavior.
(2) COMMUNITY
COLLEGE.—The term ‘‘community college’’ has the meaning given the term ‘‘junior term ‘‘artificial intelligence’’ means systems that
or community college’’ in section 312(f) of the Higher Education Act of 1965 (20 U.S.C. 1058(f)).
(3) INSTITUTION

OF HIGHER EDUCATION.—The
term ‘‘institution of higher education’’ has the
meaning given the term in section 102 of the Higher
Education Act of 1965 (20 U.S.C. 1002).
(4) LOCAL
EDUCATIONAL AGENCY.—The
‘‘local educational agency’’ has the meaning given
the term in section 8101 of the Elementary and Secondary Education Act of 1965 (20 U.S.C. 7801).
