115TH CONGRESS
2D SESSION
H. R. 5356
To establish the National Security Commission on Artificial Intelligence.
IN THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
MARCH 20, 2018
Ms. STEFANIK introduced the following bill; which was referred to the Committee on Armed Services, and in addition to the Committees on Education and the Workforce, Foreign Affairs, Science, Space, and Technology, and Energy and Commerce, for a period to be subsequently determined by the Speaker, in each case for consideration of such provisions
as fall within the jurisdiction of the committee concerned
A BILL
To establish the National Security Commission on Artificial
Intelligence.
Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the United States of America in Congress assembled,
SECTION 1. SHORT TITLE.
This Act may be cited as the ‘‘National Security
Commission Artificial Intelligence Act of 2018’’.
SEC. 2. NATIONAL SECURITY COMMISSION ON ARTIFICIAL
INTELLIGENCE.

(a) ESTABLISHMENT.—There is established in the executive branch an independent commission to be known
1 as the National Security Commission on Artificial Intel2 ligence (in this subtitle referred to as the ‘‘Commission’’).
3 The Commission shall be considered an independent estab4 lishment of the Federal Government as defined by section
5 104 of title 5, United States Code, and a temporary orga6 nization under section 3161 of such title.
(b) RESPONSIBILITIES.— (1) IN
Commission shall carry
out a review of the advances in artificial intelligence,
related machine learning developments, and associated technologies. In carrying out such review, the
Commission shall consider the methods and means
necessary to advance the development of artificial intelligence, 
machine learning, and associated technologies by the United States to comprehensively address 
the national security needs of the Nation, including economic risk, and any other needs of the
Department of Defense or the common defense of
the Nation.
GENERAL.—The
(2) SCOPE
OF THE REVIEW.—In conducting the
review under paragraph (1)(A), the Commission
shall consider—
(A) the competitiveness of the United
States in artificial intelligence, machine learning, and other associated technologies, including
matters related to national security, economic
security, public-private partnerships, and investments;

(B) means and methods for the United
States to maintain a technological advantage in
artificial intelligence, machine learning, and
other associated technologies, including quantum computing and high performance computing;
(C) developments and trends in international cooperation and competitiveness, including foreign investments in 
artificial intelligence, machine learning, and computer science fields;

(D) means by which to foster greater emphasis and investments in basic and advanced
research to stimulate private, public, academic
and combined initiatives in artificial intelligence, machine learning, and other associated
technologies, including quantum computing and
high performance computing;
(E) workforce and education incentives to
attract and recruit leading talent in artificial
intelligence and machine learning, including
science, technology, engineering, and math programs;
(F) risks associated with United States
and foreign country advances in military employment of artificial intelligence and machine
learning, including under the international law
of armed conflict, international humanitarian
law, and escalation dynamics;
(G) associated ethical considerations related to artificial intelligence and machine
learning as it will be used for future applications;
(H) means to establish data standards and
provide incentives for the sharing of open training data within related data-driven industries;
(I) development of privacy- and security-
protecting measures for data in artificial intelligence, machine learning, and associated 
technologies; and
(J) any other matters the Commission
deems relevant to the common defense of the
Nation.
(c) MEMBERSHIP.—
(1) NUMBER
Commission shall be composed of 11 members appointed
as follows:
(A) The Secretary of Defense shall appoint members.
(B) The Chairman of the Committee on
Armed Services of the Senate shall appoint 2
members.

9

(C) The ranking minority member of the

10

Committee on Armed Services of the Senate

11

shall appoint 2 members.

12

(D) The Chairman of the Committee on

13

Armed Services of the House of Representatives

14

shall appoint 2 members.

15

(E) The ranking minority member of the

16

Committee on Armed Services of the House of

17

Representatives shall appoint 2 members.

18

(2) DEADLINE

FOR APPOINTMENT.—Members

19

shall be appointed to the Commission under paragraph 
(1) not later than 90 days after the date of
the enactment of this Act.
(3) EFFECT OF LACK OF APPOINTMENT BY APPOINTMENT DATE.—If

under paragraph (1) is not made by the date specified in paragraph (2), the authority to make such

one or more appointments

appointment or appointments shall expire, and the

2

number of members of the Commission shall be reduced by the number equal to the number of appointments so not made.
(d) CHAIR

AND

VICE CHAIR.—The Commission shall
6 elect a Chair and Vice Chair from among its members.
(e) TERMS.—Members shall be appointed for the life

8 of the Commission. A vacancy in the Commission shall not
9 affect its powers and shall be filled in the same manner
10 as the original appointment was made.
(f) STATUS
FEDERAL EMPLOYEES.—Notwith-

AS

12 standing the requirements of section 2105 of title 5,
13 United States Code, including the required supervision
14 under subsection (a)(3) of such section, the members of
15 the Commission shall be deemed to be Federal employees.
FUNDING.—Of the amounts authorized to be appropriated for fiscal year 2019 for the Department of De18 fense, not more than $10,000,000 shall be made available
19 to the Commission to carry out its duties under this sec20 tion. Funds made available to the Commission under the
21 preceding sentence shall remain available until expended.
22

(h) REPORTS.—
(1) INITIAL

REPORT.—Not

later than 180 days

24

after the date of the enactment of this Act, the

25

Commission shall submit to the President and Congress an initial report on the 
findings of the Commission and such recommendations that the Com-

3

mission may have for action by the executive branch

4

and the Congress related to artificial intelligence and

5

machine learning and associated technologies, including recommendations to more effectively 
organize the Federal Government.
(2) COMPREHENSIVE

REPORT.—Not

later than
one year after the date of this enactment of this Act,
and annually thereafter until the date specified in
subsection (j), the Commission shall submit to the
President and to Congress a comprehensive report
on the review required under subsection (b).
(i) DEFINITION

OF

ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE.—In

15 this section, the term ‘‘artificial intelligence’’ includes each
16 of the following:
17
(1) Any artificial system that performs tasks

18

under varying and unpredictable circumstances without significant human oversight, or that can learn

from experience and improve performance when exposed to data sets.

(2) An artificial system developed in computer
software, physical hardware, or other context that
solves tasks requiring human-like perception, cognition, planning, learning, communication, or physical action.
(3) An artificial system designed to think or act
like a human, including cognitive architectures and
neural networks.
(4) A set of techniques, including machine
learning, that is designed to approximate a cognitive task.

9

(5) An artificial system designed to act rationally, including an intelligent software agent or embodied robot that achieves goals using perception,

planning, reasoning, learning, communicating, decisionmaking, and acting.
(j) TERMINATION.—The Commission shall terminate