II
115TH CONGRESS
2D SESSION
S. 3502
To authorize an emerging technology policy lab within the General Services
Administration, and for other purposes.
IN THE SENATE OF THE UNITED STATES
SEPTEMBER 26, 2018
Mr. SCHATZ (for himself, Mr. GARDNER, Mr. PORTMAN, and Ms. HARRIS) introduced the following bill; which was read twice and referred to the Committee on Homeland Security and Governmental Affairs
A BILL
To authorize an emerging technology policy lab within the
General Services Administration, and for other purposes.
Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives 
of the United States of America in Congress assembled,
SECTION 1. SHORT TITLE.
This Act may be cited as the ‘‘AI in Government Act of 2018’’.
SEC. 2. DEFINITIONS.
In this Act—
(1) the term ‘‘Administration’’ means the General Services Administration;
1
(2) the term ‘‘Administrator’’ means the Administrator of General Services;
(3) the term ‘‘Board’’ means the advisory board
established under section 4(a);
(4) the term ‘‘Executive agency’’ has the meaning 
given the term in section 105 of title 5, United States Code;
(5) the term ‘‘institution of higher education’’
has the meaning given the term in section 102 of the
Higher Education Act of 1965 (20 U.S.C. 1002);

11

(6) the term ‘‘nonprofit organization’’ means an

12

organization described in section 501(c)(3) of the

13

Internal Revenue Code of 1986 and exempt from

14

taxation under section 501(a) of that Code; and

15

(7) the term ‘‘Policy Lab’’ means the Emerging
Technology Policy Lab described in section 3.
SEC. 3. EMERGING TECHNOLOGY POLICY LAB.
(a) IN GENERAL.—There is within the Administration 
an office to be known as the ‘‘Emerging Technology
20 Policy Lab’’, which shall—
(1) advise and promote the efforts of the Federal Government 
in ensuring that the use of emerging technologies by the Federal Government, including 
artificial intelligence, is in the best interest of
(2) improve cohesion and competency in Federal 
agency rule making and the use of emerging technologies.
(b) DUTIES.—The duties of the Policy Lab shall include
(1) regularly convening individuals from Executive 
agencies, industry, Federal laboratories, non-
profit organizations, institutions of higher education,
and other entities to discuss recent developments in
emerging technologies, including the dissemination

11

of information regarding programs, pilots, and other

12

initiatives at Federal agencies, as well as recent

13

trends and relevant information on those technologies;

15

(2) advising Federal Government acquisition
and use of emerging technologies through technical
insight and expertise, as needed;
(3) identifying and disseminating information
regarding educational and workforce development
opportunities for Executive agency employees relative 
to emerging technology topics, and leading
those opportunities, as needed;
(4) studying economic, policy, legal, and ethical
challenges and implications related to the use of artificial intelligence 
and other emerging technologies
by the Federal Government, including how the privacy, civil liberties, and civil rights of individuals are or will be affected by the use of emerging 
technologies by the Federal Government;
(5) working with industry to improve the leadership of industry in emerging technology and the
ability to compete successfully in international markets; 
and
(6) encouraging and assisting joint initiatives
by State or local governments, regional organizations, private businesses, institutions of higher 
education, nonprofit organizations, and Federal laboratories.
(c) STAFF.—
(1) IN
GENERAL.—The
Administrator shall provide necessary staff, resources, and administrative
support for the Policy Lab.
(2) TEMPORARY

OR TERM APPOINTMENTS.—
The Administrator may hire temporary or term employees in accordance with part 316 of title 5, Code
of Federal Regulations, or any successor regulation,
to serve as Policy Lab employees.
(3) FELLOWS.—The Administrator may, to the
maximum extent practicable, appoint fellows to participate in the Policy Lab from nonprofit organizations, think tanks, institutions of higher education,
and industry.
(4) DETAILS.—When appropriate, and to the
maximum extent practicable, the Administrator may
detail Policy Lab employees to Executive agencies on
a reimbursable or non-reimbursable basis in accordance with section 3341 of title 5, United States
Code.
(d) RESPONSIBILITIES
OMBOSTP.—The
10 Office of Management and Budget and the Office of
11 Science and Technology Policy shall coordinate with the
12 Administrator and the Board to identify policy opportuni13 ties and challenges that emerging technologies, especially
14 artificial intelligence, present in the respective domains of
15 Executive agencies.
(e) REPORT TO CONGRESS.—The Administrator shall
17 submit to Congress an annual report on the Policy Lab,
18 which shall include, for the preceding year—
(1) a summary of the activity of the Policy Lab,
including a description of specific projects worked on
in partnership with Federal agencies;
(2) recommendations on ways in which Executive agencies can better support the development and
deployment of emerging technologies, including initiatives designed to promote knowledge of those
technologies among the Federal workforce; and
(3) an identification of joint initiatives encouraged or assisted under subsection (b)(6).
(f) TRANSFER
FUNCTIONS.—All functions of the
6 Emerging Citizen Technology Office of the Administra7 tion, including the personnel, assets, and obligations of the
8 Emerging Citizen Technology Office, as in existence before
9 the date of enactment of this Act, shall be transferred to
10 the Policy Lab.
(g) DEEMING OF NAME.—Any reference in law, regu-
12 lation, document, paper, or other record of the United
13 States to the Emerging Citizen Technology Office of the
14 Administration shall be deemed a reference to the Policy
15 Lab.
SEC. 4. ADVISORY BOARD.
(a) IN GENERAL.—The Administrator shall establish
18 an advisory board to advise the Administrator on issues
19 that are relevant to the mission and duties of the Policy
20 Lab and to inform the priorities and projects worked on
21 by the Policy Lab.
(b) COMPOSITION.—
(1) CHAIRS.—The Board shall be co-chaired by
the Administrator and the Secretary of Commerce.
(2) OTHER
Board shall be
composed of the following members:
(A) 1 designee from each of the following:
(i) The Office of Science and Technology Policy.
(ii) The Office of Management and
Budget.
(iii) The Department of Commerce.
(iv) The Administration.
(B) 4 designees from Federal agencies not
listed in subparagraph (A), who shall be 
designated by the Director of the Office of Management and Budget once every 12 months.
(C) 8 members designated by the co-chairs
of the Board once every 6 months, of whom—
(i) 4 shall be representatives of relevant industries;
(ii) 2 shall be representatives of institutions
MEMBERS.—The tutions of higher education; and
(iii) 2 shall be representatives of public interest groups representing privacy and
civil liberties issues.
(3) QUALIFICATIONS.—Each member of the
Board designated under subparagraph (B) or (C) of
paragraph (2) shall have demonstrated experience
and expertise in the field of emerging technologies or
technology policy.
(c) MEETINGS.—The Board shall meet not less 
frequently than once every 12 months.
(d) ANNUAL LIST.—Each year, the Board shall publish on a publicly 
available website a list of areas of im7 provement within the Federal Government that would ben8 efit from additional technical or technical policy expertise.
(e) COMPENSATION.—Members of the Board shall
10 serve on the Board without compensation, except that
11 members of the Board may be allowed travel expenses, in12 cluding per diem in lieu of subsistence, at rates authorized
13 for employees of agencies under subchapter I of chapter
14 57 of title 5, United States Code, while away from their
15 homes or regular places of business in the performance
16 of services for the Board.
(f) DURATION.—Section 14 of the Federal Advisory
18 Committee Act (5 U.S.C. App.) shall not apply to the
19 Board.
SEC. 5. REPORT.
Not later than 6 months after the date of enactment
22 of this Act, the Director of the Office of Management and
23 Budget, in coordination with the Administrator, shall sub24 mit to the Committee on Homeland Security and Govern25 mental Affairs and the Committee on Commerce, Science,
1 and Transportation of the Senate and the Committee on
2 Oversight and Government Reform and the Committee on
3 Energy and Commerce of the House of Representatives
4 a report describing—
(1) the strategy for investment by the Federal
Government in, development of, and use of artificial
intelligence; and
(2) how the strategy described in paragraph (1)
relates to the existing data strategies of Federal
agencies.
SEC. 6. UPDATE OF OCCUPATIONAL SERIES FOR ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE.
Not later than 180 days after the date of enactment
14 of this Act, and in accordance with chapter 51 of title 5,
15 United States Code, the Director of the Office of Per16 sonnel Management shall—
(1) identify key skills and competencies needed
for positions related to artificial intelligence; and
(2) establish an occupational series, or update
and improve an existing occupational job series, to
include positions the primary duties of which relate
to artificial intelligence.
SEC. 7. SUNSET.
Section 3 and 4 of this Act shall cease to be effective
3 on the date that is 5 years after the date of enactment
4 of this Act.